<p>The research community is creating ever-larger volumes of data to understand phenomena via their observable properties at every scale. Our ability to exploit these data as a common resource is hampered by a lack of interoperability in how we describe the data variable observed. A large collection of independent terminology resources and tools across research domains and communities has emerged. Their complexity and diversity often overwhelm data managers and users, ironically maintaining barriers to interoperability.</p>

<p>Great progress has already been made in providing machine-readable descriptions of sensors and their observation types through the OGC's Sensor Web Enablement SensorML, Observations and Measurements (Cox 2017) or the W3C's/OGC's Semantic Sensor Network (SSN) ontology. However, "deep metadata" that further contextualizes observations (e.g. methodology, variables, parameters) is typically represented as coarsely qualified classes (e.g. "Procedure" or "Observed property"). What exactly falls into these classes is currently unconstrained and could be anything ranging from unstandardized free-text to standardized descriptions accessible via fully resolvable URIs.</p>

<p>The RDA InteroperAble Descriptions of Observable Property Terminology (I-ADOPT) WG set itself the objective to produce an Interoperability Framework, co-developed by a diverse community of terminology experts and users, for representing and describing observable properties. This effort has a strong focus on <b>variables observed in environmental research</b> because it leverages existing efforts to accurately encode what was measured, observed, derived, or computed in relation to the Earth systems. But many of the principles it leans on will be relevant to or connected with other domains. The construction of the framework has been informed by a review of current practices used in the community. The working group is also iteratively testing and refining the framework through a set of in-depth use cases. Much like a generic blueprint, the refined conceptual framework will be a basis upon which terminology developers can formulate or refine their local design patterns, in alignment with others. With these, they may leverage their local resources in a collective attempt to represent complex properties observed across the environmental sciences (from marine, atmospheric, and terrestrial Earth sciences, as well as biodiversity).</p>

<p> For more information about I-ADOPT see the [I-ADOPT pages](https://www.rd-alliance.org/groups/interoperable-descriptions-observable-property-terminology-wg-i-adopt-wg) on the RDA website. Comments on this version of the ontology (please specify the version number when commenting) can be made by raising issue tickets in this [github repository](https://github.com/i-adopt/framework).</p> 
